# Ch 4 The Mechanics of Financial Accounting

- This chapter discusses the mechanics of preparing financial statements to report transactions accurately, timely and completely.
- This chapter also discusses reading financial statements using T-account analysis

## Economic Events

- Financial statements must only report relevant and objectively measurable __Economic events__.

### Relevant Events

- __Relevant event__: an economic event large enough to affect a company's financial condition
  - ex: elections, wars, changing CEOs...

### Objectivity

- The normal standard for __objectivity__ is when parties with conflicting objectives can agree on the truth
  - for example, when buyers (who want a low price) and sellers (who want a high price) agree on an objective price
  - objectivity also requires documentation

- If you can't honestly be objective, be conservative

## The Fundamental Accounting Equation

```Accounting
Assets = Liabilities + Shareholders' Equity
```

- All financial statements are based on the fundamental Accounting equation, but the balance sheet explicitly states how everything relates to it.
- The accounting must always balance, but even if it does, there might be accounting errors.

### Assets

- __Assets__: Items and rights obtained through objectively measurable transactions that can be used to generate revenue in the future
  - Assets are exchanged for other assets (usually cash or payables)
  - ex: cash, securities, receivables, land, buildings, machinery, equipment, and rights

- sources of assets:
  - borrow (liabilities)
  - owner contributions (Shareholders' Equity)
  - operating activities (asset exchanges)

### Liabilities

- __Liabilities__: obligations made on assets
  - ex: debts and payables

### Shareholders' Equity

- 2 Components of __shareholders equity__
  1. __contributed capital__: the dollar value of assets contributed by shareholders
  2. __Retained earnings__: the dollar value of assets generated by operating activities and retained in the business (not paid in dividends)
    - Operating activities are transactions directly associated with the acquisition and sale of a company's products or services.

``` Accounting
Assets = Liabilities + (Contributed Capital + Retained Earnings)
```

## Business Transactions, the Accounting Equation, and the Financial Statements

- __Business transactions__: the economic events of exchanging assets and liabilities.
- all business transactions can change the accounting equation, but it will always balance

### Transactions and the Accounting Equation

- This gives some examples of how different transactions affect the accounting equation

### The Accounting Equation and the Financial Statements

- Here they:
  - define "account"
  - prepare simplified balance sheets, statements of cash flows, income statement and statements of shareholders' equity

#### Accounts and the Accounting Equation

- Accounts subdivide the categories of the accounting equation
  - for example assets could have the accounts cash, receivables, land...

- Of a company's account, only a handful of the most informative accounts will appear on financial statements.
  - Financial statements should provide meaning to but not overwhelm users.

- US GAAP and IFRS use the same accounting equation

#### The Balance Sheet

- The balance sheet states the accounting equation as of a particular date.
  - It's named a "balance sheet" because the equation must balance

- Balance sheets include the accounts associated with each part of the accounting equation.

#### Statement of Cash Flows

- The statement of cash flows is only concerned with the cash account in the assets portion of the accounting equation (and balance sheet)

- The statement of cash flows divides this cash account into 3 sections:
  1. Operating
  2. Investing
  3. Financing

#### Income Statement

- The income statement measures assets generated from operating activities over a period of time.
  - *revenues*: asset inflows due to operating activities
  - *expenses*: asset outflows required to generate the revenues
  - *net income* (or *net loss*) = revenues - expenses

- Operating activities convert assets into the retained earnings account of the shareholders' equity section, hence the equation stays equal.
  - The retained earnings section includes these accounts: revenue accounts, expense accounts, and dividend accounts.
    - expenses and dividends decrease retained earnings; revenues increase retained earnings.

#### Statement of Shareholders' Equity

- The Statement of Shareholders' Equity just analyzes how the shareholders' equity part of the accounting equation has changed.
  - Example accounts in shareholders' equity: contributed capital, retained earnings
  - dividends affect shareholder's equity?

## The Journal Entry

- __Journal entries__: A short-hand way to represent which accounts are affected by a transaction and how they are affected.
  - __debit__: increases to the left side of the accounting equation, or decreases to the right side. (&uarr;&larr; || &darr;&rarr;)
    - on the left side of a journal entry
  - __credit__: increases to the right side of the accounting equation, or decreases to the left side. (&darr;&larr; || &uarr;&rarr;)
    - on the right side of a journal entry

- __Compound journal entries__ involve more than 2 accounts

### The Double Entry System

- The __double entry system__ maintains the equality of the accounting equation by ensuring `journal entry debits == journal entry credits.`
  - conceptually, the double entry system means a transaction is an exchange from one account to another

### The Journal Entry Box

- They have a memory thing here. Just remember:
  - (&uarr;&larr; || &darr;&rarr;)?debit:credit;

- components of a transaction:
  - the accounts affected
  - the amount of the affect
    - if it's positive or negative

### Journal Entries and the Accounting Equation: Examples

- figure 4-8 has some examples.
- just remember, the accounting equation is always maintained.

### T-Accounts

- __T-accounts__ are like journal entries but for only 1 account.
  - these obviously don't have to balance; but like journal entries debits go on the left, credits on the right.

- note, T-accounts start with a balance

#### An example

- see figure 4-11

#### Balance Sheet

- The ending amounts form T-accounts should be the same as the amount on the balance sheet for that account.
- The begninning amount on T-accounts should be the same as the amount on the last period's balance sheet for that account.

- __permanent__ accounts accumulate their balance from one period to the next
  - assets, liabilities and shareholders' equity are permanent 

- __Temporary__ accounts begin the next period with a 0 balance
  - revenue, expense, and dividends are temporary because they are converted to retained earnings

#### Income Statement

- The income statement for a period is revenues - expenses

#### Statement of Shareholders' Equity

- All accounts that are Shareholders' equity are reported here
  - ex: common stock, net income (which becomes retained earnings)

#### Statement of Cash Flows

- The statement of cash flows classifies cash inflows and outflows as operating, investing, or financing then places them on the statements.

## Recognizing Gains and Losses

- You need to recognize a gain or loss when you sell an investment or noncurrent asset at a price that doesn't match the amount it's been carried at on the balance sheet.
  - `The recognized amount = proceeds - carrying amount`

- Recognized values are recorded in accounts named "gain on..." or "loss on..."
  - for example "gain on sale of stock investments"

- note, gains and losses usually affect the income statement *and* the statement of cash flows.

## Periodic Adjustments

- The __accrual system of accounting__ dictates that expenses and revenues can be recorded against the transactions that incur them over time with periodic adjustments if the transactions that incur the expenses and revenues are spread over time.
  - Unlike normal transactions, __periodic adjustments__ aren't linked to a visible, document-driven exchange transaction. The visible, document-driven exchange either already happened or hasn't happened yet, but the periodic adjustments are being spread out to match corresponding expenses and revenues.

- examples of using periodic adjustments in the accrual system of accounting:
  - Recognizing net-income at period (year) end: No transaction happens when net income is recognized, but income is recognized and revenues are matched to expenses incurred to generate them.
  - Recognizing interest on a savings account as it is earned
  - recognizing depreciation of machinery as it ages

- 3 types of periodic adjustments:
  - accruals
  - deferrals
  - revaluations

### Accruals

- __Accruals__ build up over time.
  - to accrue is to accumulate gradually

- wages and interest can accrue

#### Accrued Wages

- In the *Accrual based income statement*: if an employee works, but doesn't get paid until the end of the month, the system records that they owe the employee money in a wages payable.
  - The *cash based Statement of cash flows* on the other hand doesn't show anything when company owes employees money for hours worked.

#### Accrued Interest

- In the accrual system, interest is recorded as the corresponding periods pass even if the interest and pricipal is paid in one lump sum at the beginning or end.
  - For example If I get a load for 5 years at 10% yearly interest, each year I'll record that 10 % even If I pay all the interest at the end.

- Remember accrual based accounting uses periodic adjusting to match revenues and expenses.

#### Deferrals

- 